# Final Project on "Adopt, don't Abandon!"

## Behind the scenes
This portfolio is inspired from my passion for animal welfare. During my research, I realized how abandonment actually causes grief and trauma to pets and they never seem to get out of it because they try to show it ways that are mostly cause nuisance for their new owners and they end up getting left to an animal shelter/ another family yet again. I also learned quite a few things that I wasn't aware about initially, such as the varied reasons behind a pet being abandoned, ranging from pet behivior being the most common, to divorces and new baby in the house or allergies and even landlord issues. <br/>
I wanted to bring out the entire story of a pet from adoption to abandonment and highlight the reasons along the way using data. To do this, I first began with how many US households actually own a pet. Then I found out how many of these pets are obtained through animal shelters, since that's the focus of my portfolio. Once this research was done, I moved onto learning about the reasons why people abandoned their pets. This research gave tremenduous insight about reasons along with demographic of people who abandoned and their financial state impact on this decision. With said statistics in place, my research showed that there was a change in trend of pet abandonment. On digging up the reason, it became clear that the pandemic lockdown had a major role to play, alongside other reasons such as increased pet abandonment issues awarenes and animal shelters doing a better job at pet assistance to owners. Since the trend had changed, it was inevitable to find out the main reason behind why lockdown impacted pet abandonment. The reasons of more pet time and pets as stress busters made sense and the data proved this from surveys that were conducted to learn about this impact. Finally, I wanted to highlight the call for action which essentially is not just for existing pet owners but also for prospective adopters. Prospective adopters should take time to consider whether they're really up for taking in a full time pet, and home it throughout it's lifetime or not. I researched about what is being done to prevent impulsive pet adoptions. Furthermore, I researched about how pet owners can prevent abandoning their pet by using the various grant resources provided by ASPCA and signing up for obedience training to keep their pet's behavior in check!<br/>

## Changes made from lessons learnt in Part 2:
In my Part 2, the biggest lesson I learned was that I had my data and story not properly integrated like a story. This made is difficult for the audience to feel engaged because I started off with the idea of having a Reveal section where I told the main story in brief using pictures, and then follow up with proof using data visualizations. However, this method didn't work out because the feedback I received made me realize that audience generally prefer have a co-mingling of the story and data so that it looks cohesive. In Part three, I have tried to incorporate this by making sure that the story is built up gradually, with appropriately placed data visualizations. <br/> <br/>
Another learning that I had was that transition pages are important! I did not have proper transitions in part 2 and in part 3, I made sure to have transition sections so that the changes in the story does not seem abrupt. <br/> <br/>
One thing that I have followed for part 3 is to make use of a color scheme as far as possible for the infograms and the graphs. This way it looks more consistent and neat. <br/> <br/>
One subtle change that was made was the use of consistent wordings. While I as a researcher know in depth about the pet abandonment/ adoption lingos used in research papers, it is important to be mindful of the audience and to make use of consistent keywords. For example, Owner relinquishment of their pet is same as pet abandonment but it can confuse the audience if they are used interchangeably. Pet Intake and Outcome are some other keywords animal shelters use for defining number of pets obtained and number of pet adopted/ leaving the shelter due to some reason respectively. <br/>

## Design Decisions:
I noticed that in Shorthand, the background image for Scrollmation and Text over Media generally seems brighter when uploaded. This made the text over it not visible enough. So, I made sure I increased the opacity of these background images for better text readability. <br/>
For the charts and infograms, I tried to keep the audience in mind and focused only on the key data point that I wanted to highlight, either by greying irrelevant data or making the trend evident using a bright color. <br/>
I tried to use infograms wherever I could so that the audience is not torpedoed with data visualizations and feel more engaged to the content and the storyline. 
Transition pages was a design decision as without them the change in sub topics didn't seem smooth
Another design decision was to be specific about the scope in the very beginning of the portfolio. What I mean by this is that animal shelters receive pets from a variety of channels such as from pet owners, as strays, from other shelters, etc and similarly pet owners could also get their pet from an animal shelter or friend or from a breeder. Since my research was niche, limited to the pet adoption and abandonment between pet owners and animal shelters, it was crucial to make this emphasis evident in the beginning. To do this, I made use of a simple small diagram explaining the scope. <br/>

## Lessons learnt
I learned that telling a story using data doesn' necessarily mean dozens of data visualizations about the topic but actually means how you tell that story, using data visualizations, details/ research and the way it is framed keeping the audience in mind. 
I learned how to make use of simple but powerful infograms to visualize data not using just plain graphs, bar charts but using creative visualizations that keep the audience interested and also gives them more information. <br/>

## Audience for this portfolio
The audience that I have in mind for this story are two groups of people: <br/> 1. Existing pet owners so that they understand that if at all they do abandon their pet, what is the fate and trauma that their pet goes through and how long lasting the effects could be. This portfolio also acts as an awareness about pet abandonment and how it can be prevented, almost always.<br/> 2. People who are thinking about adopting a pet. Such people should adopt only if they're fully certain that they will home the pet throughout it's lifetime and not only have the financial capability to do so but also wont be going through any such personal life changes that will impact the pet's fate to abandonment. 

